tiup: add tiup-mirror-reference.md (#5040)
pingcap/docs: tiup/tiup-mirror-reference.md

|-- timestamp.json                              # Mirror's latest timestamp
|--+ commits                                    # Mirror's update log (deletable)
   |--+ commit-{ts1..tsN}
      |-- {N}.root.json
      |-- {N}.{component}.json
      |-- {N}.index.json
      |-- {component}-{version}-{os}-{arch}.tar.gz
      |-- snapshot.json
      |-- timestamp.json
|--+ keys                                       # Mirror's private key (can be moved to other locations)
   |-- {hash1..hashN}-root.json                 # Private key of the root certificate
   |-- {hash}-index.json                        # Private key of the indexes
   |-- {hash}-snapshot.json                     # Private key of the snapshots
   |-- {hash}-timestamp.json                    # Private key of the timestamps
```

> **Note:**
>
> + The `commits` directory stores the logs generated in the process of mirror update and is used to roll back the mirror. You can delete the old log directories regularly when the disk space is insufficient.
> + The private key stored in the `keys` directory is sensitive. It is recommended to keep it separately.

### Root directory

> In a TiUP mirror, the root certificate is used to store the public key of other metadata files. Each time any metadata file (`*.json`) is obtained, TiUP needs to find the corresponding public key in the installed `root.json` based on the metadata file type (root, index, snapshot, timestamp). Then TiUP uses the public key to verify whether the signature is valid.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a TiUP mirror, the root certificate is used to store the public key of other metadata files. Each time any metadata file (`*.json`) is obtained, TiUP client needs to find the corresponding public key in the installed `root.json` based on the metadata file type (root, index, snapshot, timestamp). Then TiUP client uses the public key to verify whether the signature is valid.
```

        {
            "keyid": "{id-of-root-key-1}",                      # The ID of the first private key that participates in the signature. This ID is obtained by hashing the content of the public key that corresponds to the private key.
            "sig": "{signature-by-root-key-1}"                  # The signed part of this file by this private key.
        },
        ...
        {
            "keyid": "{id-of-root-key-N}",                      # The ID of the Nth private key that participates in the signature.
            "sig": "{signature-by-root-key-N}"                  # The signed part of this file by this private key.
        }
    ],
    "signed": {                                                 # The signed part.
        "_type": "root",                                        # The type of this file. root.json's type is root.
        "expires": "{expiration-date-of-this-file}",            # The expiration time of the file. After the file expires, the client will reject the file.
        "roles": {                                              # Records the keys used to sign each metadata file.

>             "{role:index,root,snapshot,timestamp}": {           # Each involved metadata file has index, root, snapshot, and timestamp.

Reviewer 2: The corresponding Chinese here is `涉及到的元文件由 index, root, snapshot, timestamp`. Should it be `涉及到的元文件有 index, root, snapshot, timestamp`? Or can we say `涉及到的元文件类型包括 index, root, snapshot, timestamp`? 

@lucklove Pleas take a look. Thanks!

Reviewer: Yes, you are right, should be `及到的元文件类型包括...`

>             "{role:index,root,snapshot,timestamp}": {           # Each involved metadata file has index, root, snapshot, and timestamp.

Author: ```suggestion
            "{role:index,root,snapshot,timestamp}": {           # Each involved metadata file includes index, root, snapshot, and timestamp.
```

    }
}
```

### Index

The index file records all the components in the mirror and the owner information of the components.

The index file's format is as follows:

```
{
    "signatures": [                                             # The file's signature.
        {
            "keyid": "{id-of-index-key-1}",                     # The ID of the first private key that participates in the signature.
            "sig": "{signature-by-index-key-1}",                # The signed part of this file by this private key.
        },
        ...
        {
            "keyid": "{id-of-root-key-N}",                      # The ID of the Nth private key that participates in the signature.
            "sig": "{signature-by-root-key-N}"                  # The signed part of this file by this private key.
        }
    ],
    "signed": {
        "_type": "index",                                       # The file type.
        "components": {                                         # The component list.
            "{component1}": {                                   # The name of the first component.
                "hidden": {bool},                               # Whether it is a hidden component.

>                 "owner": "{owner-id}",                          # The component administrator's ID.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
                "owner": "{owner-id}",                          # The component owner's ID.
```

Author: The Chinese is `组件管理员 ID`. I am not sure whether it can be translated as "owner". @lucklove

                "standalone": {bool},                           # Whether it is a standalone component.
                "url": "/{component}.json",                     # The address from which the component can be obtained. You need to prefix it with the version number (for example, /{N}.{component}.json).

>                 "yanked": {bool}                                # Whether the component is marked as deleted.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
                "yanked": {bool}                                # Indicates whether the component is marked as deleted.
```

            },
            ...
            "{componentN}": {                                   # The name of the Nth component.
                ...
            },
        },
        "default_components": ["{component1}".."{componentN}"], # The default component that a mirror must contain. Currently, this field defaults to empty (disabled).

>         "expires": "{expiration-date-of-this-file}",            # The expiration time of the file. After the file expires, the client will reject the file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        "expires": "{expiration-date-of-this-file}",            # The expiration time of the file. If the file expires, the client rejects the file.
```

    }
}
```

### Component

The component's metadata file records information of the component-specific platform and the version.

The component metadata file's format is as follows:

```
{
    "signatures": [                                             # The file's signature.
        {
            "keyid": "{id-of-index-key-1}",                     # The ID of the first private key that participates in the signature.
            "sig": "{signature-by-index-key-1}",                # The signed part of this file by this private key.
        },
        ...
        {
            "keyid": "{id-of-root-key-N}",                      # The ID of the Nth private key that participates in the signature.
            "sig": "{signature-by-root-key-N}"                  # The signed part of this file by this private key.
        }
    ],
    "signed": {
        "_type": "component",                                   # The file type.
        "description": "{description-of-the-component}",        # The description of the component.

>         "expires": "{expiration-date-of-this-file}",            # The expiration time of the file. After the file expires, the client will reject the file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        "expires": "{expiration-date-of-this-file}",            # The expiration time of the file. If the file expires, the client rejects the file.
```

        "platforms": {                                          # The component's supported platforms (such as darwin/amd64, linux/arm64).
            "{platform-pair-1}": {
                "{version-1}": {                                # The semantic version number (for example, v1.0.0).
                    "dependencies": null,                       # Specifies the dependency relationship between components. The field is not used yet and is fixed as null.
                    "entry": "{entry}",                         # The relative path of the entry binary file in the tar package.
                    "hashs": {                                  # The checksum of the tar package. sha256 and sha512 are used.
                        "sha256": "{sum-of-sha256}",
                        "sha512": "{sum-of-sha512}",
                    },
                    "length": {length-of-tar},                  # The length of the tar package.
                    "released": "{release-time}",               # The release date of the version.
                    "url": "{url-of-tar}",                      # The download address of the tar package.

>                     "yanked": {bool}                            # Whether this version is disabled.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
                    "yanked": {bool}                            # Indicates whether this version is disabled.
```

        "version": {N}                                          # The version number of this file. You need to create a new {N+1}.{component}.json every time you update the file, and set its version to N + 1.
}
```

### Snapshot

The snapshot file records the version number of each metadata file:

The snapshot file's structure is as follows:

```
{
    "signatures": [                                             # The file's signature.
        {
            "keyid": "{id-of-index-key-1}",                     # The ID of the first private key that participates in the signature.
            "sig": "{signature-by-index-key-1}",                # The signed part of this file by this private key.
        },
        ...
        {
            "keyid": "{id-of-root-key-N}",                      # The ID of the Nth private key that participates in the signature.
            "sig": "{signature-by-root-key-N}"                  # The signed part of this file by this private key.
        }
    ],
    "signed": {
        "_type": "snapshot",                                    # The file type.

>         "expires": "{expiration-date-of-this-file}",            # The expiration time of the file. After the file expires, the client will reject the file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        "expires": "{expiration-date-of-this-file}",            # The expiration time of the file. If the file expires, the client rejects the file.
```

        "version": 0                                            # The version number of this file, which is fixed as 0.
    }
```

### Timestamp

The timestamp file records the checksum of the current snapshot.

The timestamp file's format is as follows:

```
{
    "signatures": [                                             # The file's signature.
        {
            "keyid": "{id-of-index-key-1}",                     # The ID of the first private key that participates in the signature.
            "sig": "{signature-by-index-key-1}",                # The signed part of this file by this private key.
        },
        ...
        {
            "keyid": "{id-of-root-key-N}",                      # The ID of the Nth private key that participates in the signature.
            "sig": "{signature-by-root-key-N}"                  # The signed part of this file by this private key.
        }
    ],
    "signed": {
        "_type": "timestamp",                                   # The file type.

>         "expires": "{expiration-date-of-this-file}",            # The expiration time of the file. After the file expires, the client will reject the file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        "expires": "{expiration-date-of-this-file}",            # The expiration time of the file. If the file expires, the client rejects the file.
```

        "version": {N}                                          # The version number of this file. You need to overwrite timestamp.json every time you update the file, and set its version to N + 1.
```

## Client workflow

The client uses the following logic to ensure that the files downloaded from the mirror are safe:

+ A `root.json` file is included with the binary when the client is installed.
+ The running client performs the following tasks based on the existing `root.json`:
    1. Obtain the version from `root.json` and mark it as `N`.
    2. Request `{N+1}.root.json` from the mirror. If the request is successful, use the public key recorded in `root.json` to verify whether the file is valid.
    3. Request `timestamp.json` from the mirror and use the public key recorded in `root.json` to verify whether the file is valid.
    4. Check whether the checksum of `snapshot.json` recorded in `timestamp.json` matches the checksum of the local `snapshot.json`. If the two do not match, request the latest `snapshot.json` from the mirror and use the public key recorded in `root.json` to verify whether the file is valid.

>     5. Obtain the version number `N` of the `index.json` file from `snapshot.json` and request `{N}.index.json`. Then use the public key recorded in `root.json` to verify whether the file is valid.
>     6. For components such as `tidb.json` and `tikv.json`, the client obtains the version numbers `N` of the components from `snapshot.json` and requests `{N}.{component}.json`. Then the client uses the public key recorded in `index.json` to verify whether the file is valid.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    5. Obtain the version number `N` of the `index.json` file from `snapshot.json` and request `{N}.index.json` from the mirror. Then use the public key recorded in `root.json` to verify whether the file is valid.
    6. For components such as `tidb.json` and `tikv.json`, the client obtains the version numbers `N` of the components from `snapshot.json` and requests `{N}.{component}.json` from the mirror. Then the client uses the public key recorded in `index.json` to verify whether the file is valid.
```
@lucklove Please help confirm if `{N}.index.json` and `{N}.{component}.json` files are requested from the mirror. Thanks!

Reviewer: LGTM
